Labelling ourselves and finding names that embody our most important qualities is a process Carl Jung called individualisation.

The fact is labels ought to be therefore generally fun, tongue in cheek and/or self-effacing or lightening. 

Labels can be useful. However, the dark side of the label is all to apparent to everyone. 

This post will focus on labels related to mental health, because ironically labels are meant to improve our mental health in the process of individualisation but actually are theost damaging force lowering people's self-esteem. 

Trudging along, 
Echoing in your ears, 
Crushing your spirit, 
A bite for you, 
For you carry the label. 

Mind flopping and flipping, 
Rage rising, 
Depression looming, 
A bite for you, 
For you carry the label. 

Brow burning, 
time wasting,
Vengeance waiting,
A bite for you, 
For you carry the label

Ego brimming, 
ego flying. 
Needless of facts, 
Pride swelling, 
A bite for you, 
For you carry the label. 

It works both ways, 
Oh so specially cruel, 
Tempting as it is to bite yourself. 
Only you know when a label is useful. 

For it is it. 
Permeneant, defining, singular 
Does it sound bitter? 
It had better be right. 
Oh it's just a label. 



and when serious, properly diagnosed. It is clear people are quick to judge, simplyfy and rush to conclusions. 
and where that is incredibly useful as a trait to help us out in confusing or difficult situations, it can be scarring in personal situations. 
Anyone who rushes to imprint a negative label on you must be ignored and nowadays they are flooded in collective consciousness. 

Here are just some thoughts on the most painful labels that can be given to people. 

Autism - The most often confused mainstream label. People have different thinking styles, some are radically different such as principally top-down thinkers and those who specialise in bottom up thinking. 
It is clear autism exists and there is a spectrum, those who are extremely autistic are the ones who get labelled. However, sadly almost everyone will be seen by another person, 
from a different line or simply different way of thinking as potentially autistic. This is one of the most overused words and also needs to be taken seriously. Only experts should really label 
someone with autism. My main belief is autism is used most by people lossely as an argumentative tool. Those who disagree particularly over the style someone argues with them is most compelled to throw the A word.
Resist the temptation. 

Adhd -  This is an almost equally confusedly used. When people are determined to achieve a goal but do not know how to, or are not confident of the plan they have to achieve a target, fulfill a want, escape a situation, 
their subconscious will go into overdrive in order to find the quicker solution. That is if they are smart, and not totally rigid. It is really natural, but will leave their conscious mind confused as their intuition
will try to pull their thinking to a more ideas way of thinking. In order to solve Adhd in most cases, that is when this is the cause and its not formed a rigid brain pattern, simply let the one take their time to find an easier path to their goals. 
It is generally totally natural to be distracted in this world where we have more options and distractions, e.g. phones being pushed on to all of us. 

Bipolar - 

Narcissism - 

Ocd - 

Phycopath - 

Phycic vampirism - 

