THE ANNUAL COSMIC CYCLE
Kundalini and the full spectrum of human existence and experience follows the same cyclic pattern as plant growth through the seasons. A general monthy outline is as follows: The energy follows the annual growing cycle of Seed—JFM, Leaves—MAM, Flower—JJA, Fruit—ASO, Soil—ND. (Southern Hemisphere people are obviously switched with their flower period occurring in Jan-Feb.)

Seed—JFM—head-heart, ethereal, abstract
Leaves—MAM—heart-solar plexus, powering up, urgency, portent
Flower—JJA—belly-pelvis, highest heat and Heart, body physical illumination
Fruit—ASO—head pressure-heart-lungs, revelatory chemistry
Soil—ND—energy to pelvis, die-offs, descent to subconscious, opening up of right hemisphere consciousness (perhaps due to increased melatonin in winter)

This is a broad overview of the cosmic growth cycle which cannot reflect the infinite variables and complexity of human existence. The 22 year sunspot cycle probably follows a similar growth cycle from seed-leaves-flower-fruit-soil. This is the flow of the Tao of life, it is a hyperbolic curve that spirals through time. The astronomical influences on cell development are instigated by the solar/lunar influences on the EMF of the earth. The sunspot cycle and the moon have a greater influence on health, fertility, consciousness and behavior than any other cosmic influence I think. The goal being to unify the gestalt of objective and subjective, yin and yang, introversion and extraversion, cosmos and Self.

Yin goes inward to interior life or introversion. Yang goes outward to exterior life or extraversion. Revelation periods are usually down in the Yin valley of the smaller tides of the equinoxes, while more physical and sexual heating occurs at the Yang solstices with the larger tidal effects. Full moons are usually more palpable than new moons, but occasionally a new moon will exert just as powerful a force as the full, but in a Yin kind of way to break open the heart. The solstices, occurring at the “ends” of the elliptic, produce larger tidal effects, which represent greater accumulation and release of fluids and other matter—as is evidence by the larger menses of women in the middle and ending months of the year. How this increased accumulation and release happens in men would also be an interesting study. But one can be assured that it is tied into the annual cycles of anabolism-growth and catabolism-breakdown.

Jung
