True nursing ignores infection, except to prevent it.
Cleanliness and fresh air from open windows, with unremitting attention to the patient, are the only defence a true nurse either asks or needs.
Wise and humane management of the patient is the best safeguard against infection.
The greater part of nursing consists of preserving cleanliness.
The specific disease doctrine is the grand refuge of weak, uncultured, unstable minds, such as now rule in the medical profession.
There are no specific diseases; there are specific disease conditions."
Florence Nightengale

Prevention is better than the cure in every sense really when it comes to health. Today the pharmaceutical, nursing and advertisement industry is taking everyone for a ride, and really science is being ignored.

Take it from a science perspective, common myths include that fats are bad and make you fat, when in reality sugar is the main culprit. A second myth is that water is neccessary for health when in reality water is not that neccessary at all.

This post really is a summary of the great book 'Bechamp or Pasteur' - a lost chapter in the history of Biology.

The study of germs was greatly proppelled by Pasteur and was an outgrowth of the study of fermentation. This was a massive step backwards for humanity.

As you can see from the quote to start with, Florence Nightengale had already stated that there were no specific diseases, a counter-credit to the Germ Theory concept and she stressed how important it was to focus on preventing diseases above finding cures and treating infections as a nurse.
She said that 'diseases are not individuals arranged in classes, like cats and dogs, but conditions, growing out of one another.'

Professor Pierre Jacques Antoine Béchamp is known for the beacon experiment which he conducted in 1854 where he dissolved perfect pure cane sugar in water in a glass bottle containing air, but air tight and in several other bottles with chemicals added but no air.
Moulds and an inversion of the sugar occured just in the bottle containing air. In a second experiment he dissolved contents from the flask with mould into two of the other flasks and it formed mold. Berchamp concluded that something in air provoked the fermentation.  

Ater Béchamp had completely disclosed the physiological nature of fermentation, Pasteur initially twisted it into his own mistaken spontaneous generation theory, as shown by an article on fermentationin in the French Encyclopaedia Britannica dozens of years after the Beacon Experiment which stated Pasteur's theory of fermentation - 
'Fermentation, according to Pasteur, was caused by the growth and multiplication of unicellular organisms out of contact with free oxygen, under which circumstances they acquire the power of taking oxygen from chemical compounds in the medium in which they are growing. In other words, ‘fermentation is life without air, or life without oxygen’'

When studying wine in 1863, professor Béchamp concluded that the organism causing grapes to ferment was carried on the grape, its leaves, or the vines, and that it might also be an organism injurious to the plants. 
It took Pasteur until 1872 to reach the same conclusion in a memoir entitled 'New Experiments to Demonstrate that the Yeast Germ that Makes Wine comes from the Exterior of Grapes' though he was mitakenly advising the emperor of France long before in 1863.

Going back to the Beacon experiment and the inversion of cane sugar, Berchamp found that by adding calcium carbonate (chalk) to the mixture instead of potassium carbonate to the bottle, inversion of the cane sugar took place, but only when it was chalk not pure chemical calcium carbonate. 

Béchamp found that chalk seemed to be formed mostly of the mineral or fossil remains of a ‘microscopic world’ and contained organisms of infinitesimal size, which he believed to be alive and termed microzymas,from the Greek words for small ferment.

He subsequently proved that yeast and other animal and vegetable cells had individuality and life in the form of microzymas, which could cause fermentation. For example, milk.

These microzymas, rather than cells are the elementary units of life, the builders of cell tissues and therefore neccessary for every cell to grow, repair and die. Thus, the germs of the air are merely outgrown microzymas, that is bacteria set free when their former habitat was broken up. 

Today germs in the body are still looked on as causing the conditions/illnesses they are found with, when actually they are merely the result of these conditions. And in reality, the bacteria found in animals and man do not cause disease, they are like the soil, they are vital for human life.



