'Every idea which does not become your ideal, slays a force in your soul; every idea which becomes your 
ideal, creates within you life-forces'- Rudolf Steiner

About the author

My name is Sapna.
I'm a transcendentalist. That is, to quote - Ralph Waldo Emerson - 'I am one who believes that society and its institutions — particularly organized religion and political parties— corrupt the purity of the individual. I am one who has faith that people are at their best when truly "self-reliant and independent".
It is only from such real individuals that true community can form.

I write from my personal experience and with the help of coming from a forward culture where I was permitted to be independent, holistic and adventurous. 
This blog will be a mixture pricipally focused on delicate subjects. Therefore, I actually want to warn people to read this blog with awareness that where I touch upon spirituality, I am not advocating for an organised viewpoint, nor to create an argument, nor even one line of thought.
Disorder rules the world because ultimately people are spirituality guided. This blog will most help those spiritually seeking if it's understood that my point is to be poignant and revealing, rather than organised and narrow, when I write about spiritual matters.
That is, to leave more of an open answer to bring more questions than to support one particular organised version of reality. Whereas, I will not hold back on my critique of society and its institutions having studied the health industry and economics in depth during my life. 

I always recommend meeting experts in person to be person if you are interested in taking spiritual advice, and also to read books! We are living in the age of information. 

This blog addresses Carl Jung's observation that whilst “Modern man abhors faith and the religions based upon it... NOTHING He holds them valid only so far as 
their knowledge content seems to accord with his own experience of the psychic background. He wants to know – to experience for himself...

This is a very Jungian blog, although I myself believe now is the time for new phycologists and experts on cosmic consciousness, religion and archatypal imagery to come about and reviven the common understanding, in tandem with the new scientific discoveries, and the speeding up of time through our fast passed technological lives, as well as potentially through astrological equinox theories. 

It was Jung who noted that the psychological suffering experienced by all of his patients over the age of thirty-five ultimately arose from the loss of a religious outlook on life. In the modern era, he observed, spirit has “fallen” from the fiery empyrean above and has become “water,” evoking the sense that 
the metaphysical realm of the heavenly powers of old and even of the Kingdom of God are now to be found submerged in the oceanic depths of the unconscious. The “stars have fallen from heaven,” he proclaimed in a similar vein.

The theosophy moto - SATYÂT NÂSTI PARO DHARMAH that “there is no religion higher than truth", by Helena Blavatsky is what this subjective and transparent blog aims to represent. One truth is simple. Enjoy yourself, be happy, and I wish you well to find your balance. This is a young man's blog and purely informational. 

To leave things, I like to think we are very much born ready to be missionaries, as in correctly without ulterior motives but a will to help. And missionaries are most religious. Within all of there lies one. As this blog is scattered with my ameuteur poetry as well as other more reputed poems, I sign of this precursor with an ode to all the missionaries who have helped this world. 

For people with no mission, 
soon are lumbered with seven, 
for they race ahead as others scratch their head, 
and feel shame when others angrily beat their chest. 

Or they depend on others, 
whose ambition exceeds their grasp, 
and force them to be beggars, 
should they refuse to take part. 

And when crisis hits, 
they are the ones
best put in charge

for what they wanted
surely was most right. 
Freedom and time, 
not madness and triumph, 
nor status and compliance. 






