OH STYLO
Sing yourself
Out of depression, rise above
Always searching if I know your heart
Electric is the love.

There's only one way
Let it pray a little while longer
It's got a way of passing through man and woman
In another world
In another world, in the universe


5G has arrived and a new world has come, yet the ramifications have hardly been felt. It's an exciting time, but unfortunately almost all concerns regarding 5G voiced by critics have recieved little attention from news companies, governments and more importantly 5G producers like Samsung, Huawei and Qualcomm. 

Their concerns are over it's safety and impact on our happiness, generally from a scientific angle and there are four massive lines of thought here. 

One is to do with machinery, and how 5G will be used for surveillance and governmental weapons. 

The second is to do with its impact on our health with electricity linked to rises in diabetes, cancer and diabetes. 

The third is to do with mother-earth, how it will afect crucial species for our survival such as bee colonies and plankton.

The fourth more subjective, less scientific debate is to do with its impact on our happiness.




Starting with the biggie - nature. Electricity has always been a force to play with. Under the influence of electromagnetic forces, over billions of years, cosmic whirlpools of matter collect along these filaments, like beads on a string, evolving into the galaxies that decorate our night sky. 

In addition, thin sheaths of electric current called double layers, like the membranes of biological cells, divide intergalactic space into immense compartments, each of which can have different physical, chemical, electrical, and magnetic properties.

The chinese book written in the fourth century B.C. called 'Yellow Emperor's Classic of Internal Medicine' understood that 'Qui' was elecricity and that 'Yin' and 'Yang' are negative and positive' (electrical charges). 'The pure Yang forms the heaven and the turbid Yin forms the earth.

The Qi of the earth the ascends and turns into clouds while the Qi of the heaven descends and turns into rain.' Our nature, by means of weather is electrical. So one way to look at how 5G will affect people, is to question whether people get affected by the weather. 

Indeed, we do. Weather and therefore electrically sensitive-individuals include Charles Darwin, Benejamin Franklin, Dante, Geothe, Victor Hugo, Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, Mozart, Napoleon, Rosseau and Voltaire to name a few. 

Newton described electricity as 'an electric and elastic spirit' by which 'all sensation is excited and the member of animal bodies move at the command of the will, namely, by the vibrations of this spirit, mutually propogaed along the solid filaments of the nerves, from the outward organs of sense to the brain, and from the brain into the muscles'.

The Gorrilaz sang about the power of love being electricity and Nicholas Tesla, founder of ... was quoted saying... Almost all of the matter in the universe is electrically charged, an endless sea of ionized particles called plasma.

The earth, with its core of iron, rotates on its axis in the electric fields of the solar system and the galaxy, and as it rotates it generates its own magnetic field that traps and deflects the charged particles of the solar wind.

They wrap the earth in an envelope of plasma called the magnetosphere, which stretches out on the night side of the planet into a comet-like tail hundreds of millions of miles long. Some of the particles from the solar wind collect in layers we call the Van Allen belts, where they circulate six hundred to thirty-five thousand miles above our heads. 

Driven along magnetic lines of force toward the poles, the electrons collide with oxygen and nitrogen atoms in the upper atmosphere. 

These fluoresce to produce the northern and southern lights, the aurorae borealis and australis, that dance in the long winter nights of the high latitudes.




Look, it is really simple. On earth, it is no doubt that 5g will be affecting almost all species of life. 

From humans to birds and bees, to amphibeans and insects, to little plankton 5G poses a danger. I would argue that this has been categorically proven. 

Take for example amphibeans. The wildlife biologist ALfonso Balmori Martinez curiosity paralleled mine, and in 2009, he put his speculations to the test. During a two-month period he took care of two almost identical tanks of tadpoles of the common frog that he set out on the fifth floor terrace of an apartment in Valladolid. One hundred forty meters (450 feet) away, on the roof of an eight-story building, stood four cellular phone base stations, which were irradiating the neighborhood. The only difference between the two tanks of tadpoles was that a layer of thin fabric was draped over one.

The fabric, woven with metallic fibers, admitted air and light but kept out radio waves. The results were a shocking confirmation of what was occurring out in the rest of the world: in a period of two months, the mortality rate was 90 percent in the exposed tank, and only 4 percent in the shielded tank.

Almost all of the exposed tadpoles—exposed only to what the residents of the apartment building were also exposed to—swam in an uncoordinated fashion, showed little interest in food, and died after six weeks. Balmori titled his 2010 article, “Mobile Phone Mast Effects on Common Frog (Rana temporaria) Tadpoles: The City Turned I



The impact of radio waves on bird reproduction is no longer a matter of conjecture. Pigeons Racers will vouch pigeons have drastically lost their radar. Scientists in Greece, Ioannis Magras and Thomas Xenos at Aristotle University of Thessaloniki first exposed 240 newly laid quail eggs in an incubator to the type of radiation emitted by FM radio transmitters. 

The levels of radiation were about the same as if the birds had built nests one to three hundred yards away from a 50,000-watt tower. But these eggs were exposed for only three days, and for only one hour a day: thirty minutes in the morning and thirty minutes in the afternoon. Forty-five of the embryos died. None of 60 quail eggs, nearby in an unirradiated incubator, died.

Then the same researchers exposed 60 more quail eggs to pulsed microwaves—the type of radiation emitted by cell towers—continuously for three days, this time at only 5 microwatts per square centimeter, a level of exposure commonly found in cities today. 

Under these conditions 65 percent of the embryos were killed. In a third experiment 380 chicken eggs were exposed to microwave radiation at a power level of 8.8 microwatts per square centimeter. Instead of irradiating them as soon as they were laid, the researchers exposed the eggs between the third and tenth days of their development. Under these conditions most of the embryos lived but developed abnormally. 

Under continuous-wave radiation 86 percent of the eggs hatched, but 14 percent of the chicks died soon after birth. Almost half of the remaining chicks were developmentally retarded and 3 percent had severe birth defects. 

Pulsed radiation produced a similar number of deaths, about half the number of retarded chicks, and twice the number of birth defects. Of 116 unexposed eggs, only two failed to hatch, none had birth defects, and only two were retarded in development.

In a third experiment 380 chicken eggs were exposed to microwave radiation at a power level of 8.8 microwatts per square centimeter. Instead of irradiating them as soon as they were laid, the researchers exposed the eggs between the third and tenth days of their development. Under these conditions most of the embryos lived but developed abnormally. Under continuous-wave radiation 86 percent of the eggs hatched, but 14 percent of the chicks died soon after birth. Almost half of the remaining chicks were developmentally retarded and 3 percent had severe birth defects. 

Pulsed radiation produced a similar number of deaths, about half the number of retarded chicks, and twice the number of birth defects. Of 116 unexposed eggs, only two failed to hatch, none had birth defects, and only two were retarded in development.


Einstein reputedly was quoted to say about bees, If the bee disappeared off the surface of the globe then man would only have four years of life left. No more bees, no more pollination, no more plants, no more animals, no more man.


In the Island of Wight 1904, the bee population was hit by electricity. This is almost a certainty for in the preceding decade Gustavo Marconi decided to build the world first radio station by the needles, having given no consideration at all to the safety precautions of his feat. 

This is in spite of the fact a decade before a reputed physician, director of the laboratory of biological physics at the Collège de France in Paris had tested similar high frequency sine waves on human subjects and found that 'with very steady sine waves, nerve and muscle are not stimulated... The 

The passage of the current nevertheless is responsible for profound modification of metabolism as shown by the consumption of a greater amount of oxygen and the production of considerably more carbon dioxide. If the shape of the wave is changed, each electrical wave will produce a muscular contraction... Currents (similar to radio waves broadcasted from the Island of White) penatrate deeply into the organism (humans)”2

In essence it changed the oxygen, co2 and metabolism on humans, quite a big deal. What effect would it have on smaller animals such as bees and Marconi?  

The quickest way to destroy a bee hive, investigators have found, is to place a wireless telephone inside it. The results of such experiments, considering the complete denial by our society that wireless technology has any environmental effects at all, have been almost unbelievable.

In 2009, environmental scientist Ved Parkash Sharma and zoologist Neelima Kumar, at Panjab University in India, placed two cell phones each—one in talk mode and one in listening mode in order to maintain the connection—in two of four hives. They turned them on at 11:00 in the morning for 15 minutes, and at 3:00 in the afternoon for another 15 minutes. They did this twice a week between February and April. As soon as the phones were turned on the bees would become quiet and still “as if unable to decide what to do.” During the course of three months fewer and fewer bees flew in and out of those two hives. The number of eggs laid by the queen declined from 546 to 145 per day. The area under brood declined from 2,866 to 760 square centimeters. Honey stores declined from 3,200 to 400 square centimeters. “At the end of the experiment there was neither honey, nor pollen nor brood nor bees in the colony resulting in complete loss of the colony,” wrote the authors.

The following year Kumar performed a landmark experiment, described in more detail in chapter 11, that showed dramatically and simply how electromagnetic fields interfere with cellular metabolism. She repeated the exposure of the previous year and then analyzed the bees’ blood, or hemolymph, as it is called. After the cell phones had been on for only ten minutes, the concentration of glucose, cholesterol, total carbohydrates,
Regarding health, anxiety disorder, influenza, diabetes, heart disease and cancer were all diseases that didnt plague humanity at all before electricity became a mainstay between the 1860s and 1900s. Yes dietary changes and culture has been blamed but taking cancer for example, it is known even tobacco smoking in non-electrified times did not cause lung cancer.




5G will replace our jobs, cars, games, teaching methods, will lead to greater anxiety and potentially we'll become to immersed in technology, as in entertained at the cost of being entrained to the machine. 

Critics are debating whether the obvious benefits to 5g are actually harmful to our independence and happiness, making 5G a trojan horse gift to the public from the scientists and corporate bodies who will make a killing.
