
The guilt trap comes in all forms, it particarly rises from the games people play. 
But rather than analysing its forms, let's analyse the feeling. 
The feeling is 'you're not good enough', you are this or that and it's not fleeting. 
It's a sticky feeling, one to always hold you back, for guilt brings shame that you are different and weaker.
What triggers it is low understanding, as in unconstructive criticism of yourself by yourself or others. 
That's why being misgiving is not such a bad thing at all, for the solution to guilt is care and self-defence (just not excessive pride). 

Here's the truth, people are made to feel guilty because others are already hurting.
It's always a 'you can't - be, do, have, say' because 'you are this or that'. 
It's repugnant. 
I'm not defending unrepetance, nor advocating for happy shiny people, merely that being misgiving with criticism and praise is best. 

In truth, what guilt is is an mechanism of fear. When you have to think repeatedly about what you don't want to say before reacting to a situation, you have trapped yourself with guilt. 
What that does is bring your skeletons out of the closet and puts them for show. This is unpleasant but generally harmless, as most people's guilt are unfounded. 

One way to counteract guilt is to believe in luck and chance as a major factor in our lives. This way we dissolve our egos which falls for extremes. 
Take for instance personal finance. The best behavioural economists have shown already that luck and 
To keep it short, he basically highlighted that 

Religion is blamed for the worst in humanity and whilst I am cynical in this blog of various forms of organised religion, organised religion generally share the same profits - Judaism, Christianity, Muslim, 
all have the same prophets and at their heart have the fundamental principal of cellular forgiveness, a theory which is rooted in Buddhist philosophy as well. 
This our biological nature, we are born to transcend anger. To not forgive and forget but to forgive and understand. Our genetics we never even decided on, we are products of our parents.
And we are thrust into an environment created before us. It is very clear, though it is impossible to gather all the variables and know are fate, that fate is very real. This is the origins of our empathy.
We are not really in control, and therefore not really to blame, though there is nothing wrong with those who seek to control their lives rigidly in reaction to this outstanding truth. 






