I Am

I know not whence I came,
I know not whither I go
But the fact stands clear that I am here
In this world of pleasure and woe.
And out of the mist and murk,
Another truth shines plain.
It is in my power each day and hour
To add to its joy or its pain.
I know that the earth exists,
It is none of my business why.
I cannot find out what it’s all about,
I would but waste time to try.
My life is a brief, brief thing,
I am here for a little space.
And while I stay I would like, if I may,
To brighten and better the place.

The trouble, I think, with us all
Is the lack of a high conceit.
If each man thought he was sent to this spot
To make it a bit more sweet,
How soon we could gladden the world,
How easily right all wrong.
If nobody shirked, and each one worked
To help his fellows along.
Cease wondering why you came–
Stop looking for faults and flaws.
Rise up to day in your pride and say,
“I am part of the First Great Cause!
However full the world
There is room for an earnest man.
It had need of me or I would not be,
I am here to strengthen the plan.”

Ella Wheeler Wilcox








There is a darkside to the I am movement, and I believe that comes in two ways. The first being labelling.

Labelling ourselves and finding names that embody our most important qualities is a process Carl Jung called individualisation. The fact is labels ought to be therefore generally fun, tongue in cheek and/or self-effacing or lightening. 
Labels can be useful. However, the dark side of the label is all to apparent to everyone. Labels related to mental health are particularly hazardous, because ironically labels are meant to improve our mental health in the process of individualisation but actually are theost damaging force lowering people's self-esteem. 
I have my own thoughts of how various mental labels get confused; for instance- autism is I believe the most often confused mainstream label. What I've noticed from being in this world is that people have radically different thinking styles, for instance top-down thinkers and those who specialise in bottom up thinking. 
It is clear autism exists and there is a spectrum, those who are extremely autistic are the ones who get labelled by specialists. However, sadly almost everyone will be seen by another person, 
from a different line or simply different way of thinking as potentially autistic, so this word became one of the most overused words. My main belief is that autism is used mostly by people lossely as an argumentative tool.
Those who disagree particularly over the style someone argues with them is most compelled to throw the A word. The other overused A word I believe in circulation is ADHD and my recommendation is to resist the temptation to worry about these words unless a specialist tells you. 

Bipolar - 



