







Quantative easing really should be named quantative cheating.

Society is changing from hierarchical and institutional based trust to a more peer-to-peer and heterarchical trust, a gradual change over centuries that in Western Civilisation has now accelerated enormously in the last decades as a result of the Internet. Reviews, rating sites, blogs, friends and colleagues are now firmly new sources of trust that the public relies on, whilst on the other hand, the media, government and powerful institutions, such as banks, are now widely and ever-increasingly mistrusted. The 2007 financial crisis perfectly illustrates how vulnerable the economy is when powerful institutions make mistakes, and certainly led to a drastic fall in the public’s trust of banks. Let’s condemn quantitive easing for what it is. It is as a way for pension and insurance funds (those who sell government bonds) and for banks to become richer, as well as for stock-markets to become more valuable.
Not just that, it is a way for governments to artificially boost the economy to garner short-term popularity, at the cost of increasing public debt to the expense of the everyday citizen and in the long-term devalue the currency and thus people’s everyday spending-power. The new wealth created is in the pockets of the few and it has been proven that it never trickles down to the majority to compensate for their loss in wealth.
Quantititve cheating does not have the effect it was designed to by affecting monetary policy in an effective manner. Ocasionally, it has appeared to work such as in March 2009, when following the 2008 crash the Bank of England began to slash interest rates and buy bonds. The economy somewhat recovered: there was a record low level of unemployment and the UK grew faster than fellow European Countries.
But the reality of it is, is that it almost certainly was a mixture of animal spirits and chance, since interest rates hardly changed. Another time perhaps it worked, was in 2014 when there have even been years of real-wage growth between September 2014 and September 2016 (as shown by graph). There is always an argument quantative easing would work if it was left to be used only in emergencies, as it was always originally conceived to be used for, such as in 2009.

The facts show that quantitive easing is highly, highly ineffective, and rather crudely balloons levels of inequality which are already far too high. 
Figures show under the UK government’s Quantitive easing scheme, it extraordinarily ‘takes £375 billion of new money just to create £23-28 billion of extra spending in the real economy’ whilst it has ‘boosted bond and share prices by around 20%’, which theoretically have made the richest 5% of households ‘up to £128,000 better off’.
As the crude concept ‘money makes money’ has overwhelming been proven to be true, the ‘trickle-down theory’ that quantitive easing depends upon to justify its use in any situation other than an emergency one, simply doesn’t convince. 
Thus, in my opinon, the statistics show that the Bank of England simply cannot be trusted to use Quantitive easing sparingly and only in emergency circumstances, and this illustrates that there is a current need for Bitcoin, a de-centralised means of exchange, to revolutionise the system, or completely new banks.

UK interest rates have been below 1 percent since 2007. This not only indicates that quantitive easing has failed, but also that institutions cannot be trusted to positively affect the economy through monetary policy (due to fear, hidden agendas or lack of understanding of the markets), as if interest rates were to be used effectively they would surely be more versatile and adaptable to the current and future predicted state of the economy. 
Whilst the UK economy has been relatively stable since 2007, it has certainly gone through notably differing periods of struggle, uncertainty and growth which could have been capitalised or curtailed accordingly by monetary policy. What the interest rates show is that all that the investors are looking for is a sense of stability, which Bitcoin should be able to provide should it be universally accepted and free from speculation-driven volatility.
Pertinently, given the Brexit situation, even those in favor of monetary policy view the crises in Europe to have been at least partially caused by the European Central Bank issuing the same interest rates for countries like Germany and France as for countries like Spain, Portugal and Greece. This is madness, countries vary so heavily in monetary needs but have the same currency, the Euro, unbalancing and distorting trade between the EU nations. 
If it’s revolutionary for trade that people of different countries should be able to share a universal currency then Bitcoin provides a better answer (as long as it doesn’t replace individual national currencies) whilst a single shared currency run by a single shared bank has proven to not be effective in times of crises.

Fiscally, economics is still heavily centered around Keynesianism. Keynes argued that governments needed mechanisms to appreciate or depreciate the currency as he noted wages were rigid, and that this was a massive factor that caused the great depression of the 1930s, and the 1925 Gold Standard Act which led to unemployment and underproduction because it inhibited the governments capabilities.
However, modern-day wages are no longer so fixed, as Uber for example proves so monetary expansionary/contractionary policy is necessary. Milton Friedman, a libertarian, predicted e-cash to revolutionise the system in the 90s, as it would prevent the government from collecting taxes so easily on the internet. Opposing Economists of thought believe tax is essential, so that fiscal policy can be implemented in a positive and sustainable manner to society’s benefit. 
If Bitcoin were accepted by governments and society as the most effective means of payment and the most common form of payment, the economy would be undoubtedly revolutionised in two fundamental ways: on a macro-level, it would replace monetary policy and prevent quantative easing. Thereby, it would facilitate fiscal policy, whilst on a micro-level, it would increase consumer-power and decrease producer-power.
It is widely believed that the CIA/NSA have likely deanonymized most of the bitcoin network to date, and has been estimated by the IRS tax cheats cost the US government $458 billion a year. Pertinantly, Satoshi built bitcoin to work within global jurisdictions, not to replace them. Therefore, Bitcoin should potentially be an incredible powerful fiscal tool.










