ELEMENTS AND APRECIATION

´Fire, earth, air and water,
back to the elements,
we resort,

crazy , heavy, flaky, sad
emotions that are neither good nor bad,

Evening each other
through neccessary contrast 
so that 

hot, strong, light and suave,
feelings of home can start to flow,
from which grows an apreciation of the past.´


This being the most basic subject discussed in the blog, is by far the most important, even if extremely basic. The elements of life are our very being.

There are four main ones, which i will put in both western and oriental terminology - fire (tejas), air (prana), earth  and water (our ojas). The akasha field is the fifth one.

These correlate with Carl Jung's four functions of mind - thinking, feeling (water), intuition and sensation.

Then there are four elemental forces driving us - electromagnetisism, the weak force, the strong force and gravity - if we go further, we can say quanta all around the earth arriving from our akasha field. 

The more you study eastern, western, ancient and modern scientific knowledge in these forces and subject the more personal power you may attain and the more the world may open up to you.

For the time being all our words for all portant energy is from other countries - chi is Chinese, prana is Sanskrit and Ki is Japanese.

Yogis, budhists, shamans and all wise people, even if some are less aware they are doing so, have looked after the world through managing these forces at play in themselves and healers, teachers and parents in others.

During my early time as a transcendalist, I experienced such a widening in conciousness that I was forced to for a time to resort to focusing almost purely on the basics of these elements, so reactive was my neuronal field.

I simplified life so much on long walks, I noticed how colours, sensations and intensities in feelings came about through each thought I had, a blessing of seeing more of my neuronal field, and this permitted me to manage my mood in difficult patches.  

Almost all adjectives, slang and descriptive words stem from the four elements. To keep it simple, lets start with 'going with the wind'. Literally, you can, and should if you want a pain-free life. No-one will blame you.

As shown earlier, even the most respected of phyco-analysists Carl Jung, derived his fundamental theories I believe from the four elements.

This blog is a complicated blog, but this first post, oh so simple, most accurately describes our being, and gives a taster for a fair share of the posts focused on energy, spirituality and philosphosy.
