TAX HAVENS

The world is run through Havens, making them quintessentially the real economy. They are sadly relics of colonial times. We are living in the 21st century, and the slave trade and colonial economic situation of times gone by still lie in place. 

The world contains approximately 60 tax havens in which Gabriel Zucman, an Associate Professor of Economics at UC Berkley, has “conservatively” estimated approximately $7.6 trillion from all nation’s wealth lies offshore (8%).

More realistically it's more. James S Henry, an American economist, lawyer, and investigative journalist has estimated that between $21 to $32 trillion lies offshore (22 -34%).

Numbers are abstract unemotive tools, so let's put that in comparison to the most famous economics disaster of recent time. 

Greece's national debt was 264,775 million euros in 2008, enough to put the millions of Greeks out of job, homeless, even suicidal. To help aid this comparison, how many millions are in a trillion. Well, a billion is a million million and a trillion is a thousand billion. 

That's a lot of dollars. 

The bigger question is to who does it belong to? The Hamiltons, the royals, the top politicians, the wealthiest Arabs, terrorists and banking families, the masons, the ones who are intent on whipping the world to work or just the celebs who couldn't share their fortune. In other words, tax havens are how the powerful people control the financial world. 





It all really started in London, in 1959 with the birth of the Euromarket (Eurobond-market). Before that there was only really a much more cautious Switzerland. 

‘By late 1959 about $200 million or so was on deposit in the Euromarket in London; by the end of 1960 it had reached a billion, and a year later the total was $3 billion’. It then exploded, wolf of wolve street style, reaching $500 billion in 1980, then a net $2.6 trillion eight years later. 

This Americanised England. In 1964, eleven US banks had branches in the City of London. In 1975, fifty-eight did! The American banks killed the little English banks which actually cared about the customer. 

Now London and New York, not the little islands in the Caribbean, are the leading offshore tax havens. London hosts more foreign banks than any other financial centre. In 2008 the city accounted for half of all international trade in equities, nearly 45 percent of over-the-counter derivatives turnover, 70 percent of Eurobond turnover, 35 percent of global currency trading, and 55 percent of all international public offerings. 

New York is bigger in areas like securitization, insurance, mergers and acquisitions, and asset management, but much of its business is domestic. 



Tax havens controlled by London with Wall Street interests in mind include Anguilla, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Gibraltar, Montserrat, the Turks and Caicos Islands, Jersey, Guernsey and Isle of Man.

In the Cayman Islands – ‘the governor sent from London remains responsible for defence, internal security, and foreign relations; he appoints the attorney general, the judiciary... The final appeal court is the Privy Council in London.’ It is our little Britain.

Panama was turned into a tax haven so that the Standard Oil company could avoid paying US taxes during the construction of the Panama Canal. Panama became a US colony like a lot of little Latin-American countries, to the detriment of Panama itself. 

In fact, American policy served to insulate the Panamanian economy from the Canal, which is one of the greatest monuments in the world. 

US tax havens include Alaska, Florida, Nevada, New Hampshire, South Dakota, Delaware, Tennessee, Texas, Washington, Wyoming and has associated state tax havens such as Puerto Rico, the American Virgin Islands and the Marshall Islands. France have used tax havens to keep control of African countries. 

Essentially tax havens are relics of the slave trade. 


So how do tax havens and the real economy work? 

They work in unison. Whilst London has a special relationship with Wall-Street banks, Switzerland has a special relationship with Europe and the rest of the world.

In 1974 the first modern survey made by the US Treasury on the holdings of US financial securities by non-American residents showed that Switzerland, a country that has scarcely more than 0.1% of the world’s population, held almost a third of all American stocks that belonged to non-Americans, far more than the United Kingdom (15%), Canada (15%), France (7%), or Germany (3%)

In the spring of 2015 foreign wealth in Switzerland will have reached $2.3 trillion. Around $1.3 trillion belongs to Europeans, or the equivalent of 6% of the financial holdings of EU households. 

Tax havens have in fact had a tendency to specialize in the various stages of wealth management, tiny Luxembourg is the ‘the number- two country in the world for the incorporation of mutual funds, after the United States.

More than 60% of accounts in Switzerland are thus held through the intermediary of shell companies headquartered in the British Virgin Islands, trusts registered in the Cayman Islands, or foundations domiciled in Liechtenstein… The Anglo- Saxon trusts do not compete with the opacity services sold by Swiss banks; the two techniques of dissimulation have, on the contrary, become fundamentally intertwined. 

Economist Gabriel Zucman points out there are two tax havens that have become so international that over a third of their GDP is ‘net primary income paid to the rest of rest of the world – salaries, dividends and interest’. 

These are Puerto Rico, where ‘almost all the capital there is held by Americans, who hire the local population; all profits return to Uncle Sam’ and Luxembourg. He highlights fundamental between Puerto Rico and Luxembourg – ‘Puerto Rico is not an independent nation. The US Congress imposes most of the laws there, but the local population does not have American citizenship. It cannot elect a senator, a representative, or the president of the United States.’ Luxembourg is not just independent, it is a member of the European Union, where it has a right to veto tax reform proposals. 

This means ‘the representative of the 500,000 inhabitants of Luxembourg can impose his will on 500 million Europeans’ and in ‘secret’.

Canada is the new tax haven. The disease is expanding. 



The tax havens themselves are suffering because of it, that is besides the bankers. In the Caymans the privacy laws are so strict, you can go to jail not only for revealing information but just for asking for it. 

Smaller islands like Jersey society suffer the most. Dealing with high levels of money will make the environment more claustrophobic, as the islands get financially captured and critical opinions become rarer. 

Luxembourg, being for its size one of the biggest havens, has suffered the most. It was most affected by the financial crash - between 2007 and 2009, the GDP per worker was lowered by 10% (as opposed to 2% in France). But long before 2007, its economy has been demising.

Luxembourg's growth has been low, 1.4% per year since 1970, in a time in which inequality has risen dramatically and the countries main steel-industry has been demised, politically it is one of the corruptest places on earth as well. Cayman registered banks hold 1 trillion dollars in assets, equivalent to 100,000 per cent of that microstate’s gross national product. It is clear where the power lies, its not the locals. 


Thus, this blog has neatly shown where the money is. Its not just that though, without touching on the corruption side. As I just mentioned, Little islands and states are prone to financial capture and the feects literally change the world, more than any scandal typically shown in the news. 

In Delaware a monumental state legislature was passed. It showed Delaware to be a legislature for hire, ultimately captured by two banks- Chase Manhattan and J.P. Morgan, who wanted to end historical laws appertaining to usury provisions. The law was rushed through, in a race with Citibank who had targeted South Dakota to pass favourable laws, and in the knowledge that there would be considerable opponents to the law in Washington and New York. Delaware’s Consumer Affairs Department never saw the bill before its passage because it would have objected to it. 

The banks success meant ‘two hundred years of legislation capping interest rates in the United States had now lost all force’. The laws changed the national landscape.

Under the new laws that Chase Manhatten and J.P Morgan in effect wrote ‘Delaware was to remove interest rate ceilings on credit cards, personal loans, car loans, and more. Banks would have powers to foreclose on people’s homes if they defaulted on credit card debts; they could establish places of business overseas or offshore, and they got a regressive state tax structure to boot. And crucially, because Delaware law could now be “exported” to other states, this was to be rolled out across America.’

‘Perhaps no other public policy better illustrates the centrality of the 'marketplace' and the primacy of big business in Delaware," remarked William Boyer "It also illustrates how a small group of Delaware business executives and lawyers can prevent the public and its elected representatives from participating actively in the formulation, review and authorization of important public policy.’

The law did benefit Delaware whose revenue just from the bank franchise tax before 1980 was around $3 million per year. By 2007 it was taking $175 million. More significantly, this law encouraged the rise in consumerist culture that has happened; and  contributed heavily to the 2008 financial crisis and how people were able to handle such a crisis-  ‘with interest rates caps removed, the credit card industry took off, and Americans splurged on debt. By mid-2007, as the global financial crisis emerged, U.S. consumers owed nearly $1 trillion on their credit cards—and that is not to mention loans people took out against their homes to pay the credit card bills.’ 

Usury, especially over the top usury has been one of the biggest crimes of humanity. 


In Jersey, very recently, in 1995 a magic offshore firm ‘Mourant du Feu & Jeune’ informed Jersey that they had a written a new law for the island, regarding a corporate form called Limited Liability Partnership (LLP). The law firm had been working with the Big Four Accounting firms who wanted the best perks of Partnerships –‘less disclosure, lower taxes, and weaker regulation—but it gets the limited liability protection too. 

And if a partner commits wrongdoing or is negligent, other partners who are not involved aren’t accountable for the consequences. This law was the product of what Professor Prem Sikka, of Essex University, calls auditors’ ultimate aim “to use the state to shield it from the consequences of its own failures.' ‘The draft Jersey LLP Act was worse still. LLPs would not need to have their own accounts audited or even to say on their invoices or letterheads that they were registered in Jersey. 

It had no provisions for regulating audit firms or investigating misdemeanors, and it offered other audit stakeholders—that is, the public—almost no rights. To get these astonishingly generous concessions from the public at large, these multibillion-dollar global corporations would have to pay a one-time fee of just ten thousand pounds at first, then five thousand pounds a year afterward.’

The proposed LLP Act was a high-risk idea. When Auditors make mistakes, it tends to lead to economic crashes such as Enron and World.Com. Due to the importance of their job they should always have a pressure to be accountable for whatever decision they make when auditing firms, otherwise the accountancy firms might be start setting lower standards for themselves. The downsides and risks of enacting a law granting LLPs are all foreseeable for experts and lawyers but they would not be apparent for everyday people from Jersey.

Unfortunately, in 2008 the four big Accounting Firms failure to Audit properly junk derivatives led to the financial crisis. These limited liability provisions ‘took away the most powerful incentive for self-policing by the corporate professions of law and accounting and help explain the wave of corporate cheating that swept the country.’


The 2008 financial crisis was enormously worsened, even partially caused by tax havens. Keynes wrote in 1933 that ‘There may be some financial calculation which shows it to be advantageous that my savings should be invested in whatever quarter of the habitable globe shows the greatest marginal efficiency of capital or the highest rate of interest. But experience is accumulating that remoteness between ownership and operation is an evil in the relations among men, likely or certain in the long run to set up strains and enmities which will bring to nought the financial calculation.’ 

The trigger cause of the global financial crisis was the popping of a housing bubble in the US but it led a global financial crisis precisely because the financial markets no longer really knew what the buying or selling, nor the big four auditors what they were rating. Tax havens played a major reason for. US sub-prime mortgages were mixed with all sorts of other debts, sliced and diced into securities, re-packaged and re-marketed throughout the whole world from banks operating in offshore facilities.
 
In 2009, the Bank for International Settlements detailed how the ‘most common jurisdictions for US securitisations are the Cayman Islands and the state of Delaware… The most common SPE jurisdictions for European securitisations are Ireland, Luxembourg, Jersey, and the UK.’ London and tax havens such as the Netherlands, Cayman Island and Ireland were therefore at the heart of the US-sub-prime mortgage crisis. On IMF published document– ‘The (sizable) Role of Rehypothecation in the Shadow Banking System’ it is estimated that by 2007 ‘the seven biggest banks (Lehman Brothers, Bear Stearns, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, Merrill/BoA, Citigroup, and JPMorgan) had shifted $4.5 trillion off their balance sheets.’

To emphasise how risky this was, the Lehamn Brothers even  ‘had to go to a English law firm to be able move to do a repo 105 manoveour (which allowed it to move)… $50 billion of assets off its books (and) conceal its heavy borrowing, or leverage’. 

No U.S. law firm would sign off on the transactions but in the UK there are no statutory limits governing the reuse of a client's collateral and a major firm did.It was the shadow bank Lehman Brothers’ eventual bankruptcy filing, the largest recorded in history, which quite literally sparked for the Financial Crisis and the scale of its collapse was provoked by such little offshore regulation and such poor auditing standards.

Research has backed this up and concluded that by ‘facilitating the endogenous evolutionary instability of these markets (Asset Backed Comercial Paper programmes)…(offshore markets) had profoundly negative effects’.



As mentioned all the big superficial financial players, companies and organisations have their monies concealed in havens. It is an abysmal state of affairs because eof tax haven secrecy laws. The US is by far the worst and most hypocritical nation today

According to U.S treasury officials ‘in a good year they caught 0.1 percent of the illicit inflows into the country – a 99.9 percent failure rate. A Swiss central banker told… his country’s record was probably worse: 99.99 percent.’

The World Bank carried out a survey of how criminals use legal structures to hide stolen assets and ‘said trusts were so difficult to investigate or persecute that they are seldom prioritised in corruption investigations’.

There are even offshore jurisdictions where it is established trusts are impenetrable, such as the Cook Islands and Nevada. ‘To date, no effort to break a Cook Islands asset protection trust has been successful’. A Florida based plastic surgeon, Richard Edison, nicknamed Dr. Dread was ‘sued after five of his patients died and he left a sponge in a woman’s breast. His assets, in a Cook Islands trust, were immune.’

Nevada has ‘18,000 corporate structures based on the island, a significantly higher number than Nevis has people’ and it has been discovered that the likes of ‘Ukraine’s ex-president Viktor Yanukovich hid his ownership of coal mines behind Nevis companies’, after documents he had tried to destroy were ‘fished out of the Dnieper river in 2014’. Like the Cook Islands, ‘there has not been a single case of a creditor ever managing to pierce a Nevada trust’, although Nevada is viewed as more respectable.

Like in Nevis, Nevada ‘asset protection ordinances mean that – providing two years have passed since you put your property in trust – your creditors have no way of getting hold of it’; and in ‘Nevadan law, you can even be a beneficiary of your own trust, which means you’ve given your property away, so it can’t be taken away from you, and yet you retain all the benefits of owning it.’

In 2001, ‘UBS agreed to become a Qualified Intermediary (QI), under which… the Swiss banks could keep their secrecy as long as they promised to collect tax on the Treasury’s behalf’. However, it preceeded to do the opposite and ‘aggressively expanded, marketing undeclared accounts to as many rich Americans as it could’ and helping ‘its US clients structure their Swiss accounts to avoid reporting billions of dollars in assets to the IRS’. 

However, self-proclaimed “Lucifer’s banker”- Bradley Birkenfeld whistle-blew on his employees at a time they were not in a position to defend themselves- the 2008 financial crisis had put UBS on the brink of existence- which led to UBS being fined $780 million. More importantly, it led to the US passing a federal law - Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA), whereby ‘foreign banks refusing to disclose accounts held by US taxpayers face clearly defined economic sanctions: a 30% tax on all dividends and interest income paid to them by the United States’.

This law led to over a 100 countries sharing their information on assets held by US citizens or residents.  What makes the US so hypocrical is that since US institutions do not share what’s happening in the United States regarding other countries assets, in essence, via using the threat of sanctions ‘the United States had bullied the rest of the world into scrapping (their) financial secrecy, but hadn’t applied the same standards to itself…’; indirectly, giving tax havens in the US, like Nevada, an advantage over Switzerland for example, and making uncorperative black-listed haven like the Cooke Islands more appealing for US citizens.


The biggest point of tax havens being the real economy, not touching on the black market/ corruption/ money laundering aspects of havens, but sticking to the laws of havens and secrecy lies in the issue of double taxation, transfer pricing and comparative advantage. By that, I mean how corporations, industries and monopolies thrive from not paying taxes using offshore havens. 

To explain how what should be a good thing, transfer pricing, has turned overwhelmingly negative. Tax havens essentially abuse their financial competitive advantage. The British Virgin Islands, with fewer than twenty-five thousand inhabitants, hosts over eight hundred thousand companies. Gabriel Zucman points out that out of US’s 650 billion of foreign profit, 55% is made in six low or zero tax countries: the Netherlands, Bermuda, Luxembourg, Ireland, Singapore, and Switzerland.

The data shows it is clear that corporations are picking their location based on perks with legislation and tax exemptions, as opposed to whether they are more technical, specialised or creative workforces there, so that they can be more productive. Profitability is coming first, contributing to monopolies earning unnatural super-profits at the consumers cost. Shaxson writes ‘In October 2010 Google Inc. cut its taxes by $3.1 billion in the previous three years through transfer pricing…. The problem is getting worse. Microsoft’s tax bill has been falling sharply, for similar reasons. Cisco is at it. They are all at it. Transfer pricing alone cost the United States an estimated $60 billion a year.’

A defence can be made for why this is all necessary and that is because corporations and individuals previously could be subjected to double taxation. Individuals could be taxed at both the corporate and personal level, or alternatively in investments and in international trade, individuals and corporation could be taxed twice by different countries. However, when tax havens eliminate double taxation, something else happens too: double nontaxation. For example, one of Apple’s Irish subsidiaries typically paid less than 0.1 per cent in tax because when Apple’s operations are internationally incorporated in Ireland, under US law Apple would not be a tax resident in the US. 

As Ireland uses a different test for tax residence – whether Apple was functionally managed and controlled from (US) - it too did not tax Apple. In the end, 215 billion was estimated to have been stashed offshore by the end of 2017 by Apple. This is a clear market loss. PFI schemes in the UK represent another market failure. Treasury data shows that while the capital value of assets under PFI schemes added up to 59.4 billion in 2016, the British taxpayer would end up paying out more than 306 billion over the lifetime of these projects. Tax Havens and transfer pricing have made PFI schemes much more costly.

Just nine infrastructure funds, all based offshore, hold controlling stakes in nearly half of all the 700 odd PFI projects in Britain… A study of the five largest PFI firms showed they paid no tax on their profits in 2011-15. Facebook, Netflix and Amazon are three of the most highly profitable and popular businesses, yet all three avoid paying tax through transfer price, gaining an upper hand over small competitors who don’t. In Amazon’s case, this is particularly bad because by now it is one of the world’s biggest monopolies, is owned by the world’s richest man Jeff Bezos, and yet is tax avoiding in the most aggressive manner. 

Raymond Baker estimated for the World Bank that ‘only about a third of total illicit cross-border flows represent criminal money—from drug smuggling, counterfeit goods, racketeering, and so on. Corrupt money—local bribes remitted abroad or bribes paid abroad—added up to just 3 percent of the total. The third component, making up two-thirds, is cross-border commercial transactions, about half from transfer pricing through corporations. 

Economist Nicholas Shaxson reflects that there 10 billion euro in total European cartel-related fines in the five years to 2017 may sound grand, but at 2 billion per year represented just 0.03 per cent, or about one three-thousandth, of European corporate profits over the period, which is astonishing, given how extensively monopolies now pervade our economies. 


So it's clear, without touching on the corruption side of tax havens, that they are the spider web affecting all of the economy. Without wishing to sound like a left-leaning, Orwellian, but in all honesty greater economists had predicted the dark side of tax havens before it was advertised by the neo-liberals, such as Friedrich Hayek, Arthur Laffer etc. 

Keynes wrote in 1933 that 'there may be some financial calculation which shows it to be advantageous that my savings should be invested in whatever quarter of the habitable globe shows the greatest marginal efficiency of capital or the highest rate of interest. But experience is accumulating that remoteness between ownership and operation is an evil in the relations among men, likely or certain in the long run to set up strains and enmities which will bring to nought the financial calculation.

In essence, it's best to keep monies close to home and above all have trade regulated and billionaires transparent. Seems obvious, but in the last 50 years the real economy has been shattered. 


The biggest point to make is that the economy should be structured in a less competitive manner. Tax havens became big because they gave countries colonial-like power, and because various country's governments saw setting up their laws to turn their countries into havens would give their countries a competitive advantage over those that didn't. This applied for bigger countries and smaller ones alike.

When a firm competes against another and loses, it goes bankrupt which negative for a small, generally wealth group of people -its shareholders. It’s far from ideal for its employees, but in a functioning economy these employees should be able to find work at other firms (the winning firm perhaps), and the damage can be contained to some extent. However, when a country loses or collapses it can lead to war, starvation, corruption and take decades to heal.  Finally, if countries take a more competitive approach to other countries, helping other countries get stronger as well itself, it is likely to benefit itself – for instance, by gaining more international business etc.

The most important questions to raise is what might happen to the losers when nations compete as if they are corporations or a football team. When a firm competes against another and loses, it goes bankrupt which negative for a small, generally wealth group of people -its shareholders. It’s far from ideal for its employees, but in a functioning economy these employees should be able to find work at other firms (the winning firm perhaps), and the damage can be contained to some extent. However, when a country loses or collapses it can lead to war, starvation, corruption and take decades to heal.  

Finally, if countries take a more competitive approach to other countries, helping other countries get stronger as well itself, it is likely to benefit itself – for instance, by gaining more international business etc. That is the future for the real economy.



