The choice - William Butler Yeates

'The intellect of man is forced to choose
perfection of the life, or of the work,
And if it take the second must refuse
A heavenly mansion, raging in the dark.
When all that story's finished, what's the news?
In luck or out the toil has left its mark:
That old perplexity an empty purse,
Or the day's vanity, the night's remorse.'

This post will be centred on two points of view. The first philosophocal questioning the poem the choice, and the latter, more literally - from an economics viewpoint taking into account the views of economists Friedman, Keynes and Rajatnaram .

The first is arguably the greatest question hummans have to face, once given the chance of economic freedom. I firmly believe it is not impossible to achieve a balance of both, but realistically to be an expert or to be most free materially and consciously you have to choose one of the either. 

Perhaps, even if you're principal goal is to have both cakes and try to heroically eat them, you will find life doesn't let you, as it goes in fluxes, and therefore you have to make the difficult choice. That is less of a perhaps, and more of a certainty in my eyes.

It is the chance to create, at the cost of to enjoy. It is the chance to express at the cost of to relax. It is the chance to perfect, at the cost of to co-operate with lifes gifts to you, that is found from going with the flow. I believe this is not a spiritually Lucie vs Alleluia debate, though arguably Yeats is addressing some chapter in the bible.

It's more simple really. Yeat's isn't being cynical of the heavenly mansion, leaving the individual feeling creatively frustrated, for creativity creates karm and raging in the dark. He's being plainly honest about it, what does perfection of life entail? It entails knowing yourself, your wants and needs - that is it entails dedication to vanity. It entails losing the ability to make a mark on the world through a piece of career, losing the chance to be your artist, for vanity's sake - which is worthy of remorse.

Yet equally, Yeat's isn't glorifying the dedication to work, he is politely cynical of it  - conceding how much luck plays it role, and how work takes a toll even if you are lucky, not to mention the austerity. Yeat's even goes as far as to state, if you pick the work, when all that's story finished - what's the news?

In other words, Yeat's is touching on the price of freedom on a personally level, in the lightest, most allegory way possible.

But what is the price of freedom according to economists.

Milton Freidman wrote - ‘Our minds tell us, and history confirms, that the great threat to freedom is the concentration of power...' He highlights how economically we are all dependent on each other, perfectors of work and perfectors of life alike, stating - 'The challenge to the believer in liberty is to reconcile this widespread interdependence with individual freedom’.

Freidman believed financial freedom was further interwined with political freedom stating ‘economic freedom is also an indispensable means toward the achievement of political freedom’, .

Of course pure economic freedom does not exist, on a practical sense that is for mere humans; not everything can be brought and not everything can be valued. Therefore, perfection of life entails more than just materialism, and even from the pure financial side, would require co-operation with artists and workers.

Touching on politics, lets move away from the poem and go further into economics, hisory and politics.

Friedman also wrote ‘if economic power is kept in separate hands from political power, it can serve as a check and a counter to political power’  and ‘the tyranny of the status quo is enforced… when the firms that would specialize in speculation and arbitrage in a free market for exchange do not exist.’

Whilst it is clear economic power should be kept in separate hands form political power, and the issue in our society today appears to be that economic power is so concentrated amongst so few, these individuals have captured political power, I have to disagree with Friedman's overall viewpoint. 

It is my belief that speculation and arbitrage in the free market for exchange has contributed to that captured state of politics, and therefore somewhat imprisoned the population with a neo-liberal status-quo mentality.

The founder of modern-economics, Adam Smith, wrote - ‘it is not very unreasonable that the rich should contribute to the public expense, not only in proportion to their revenue, but something more than in that proportion.’ 

He was hinting at the reasonableness of the notion that policies can be centred around seeking equality (but only to an extent). Ever since the British tax haven came to fore, two economic changes have happened that have increased global levels of inequality. So the price of freedom does appear to be to tax the wealthy.

Firstly, taxes in the biggest economies have been regressively reformed, leading to a loss in tax revenue and more wealthy billionaires: ‘U.S. corporations paid about two-fifths of all U.S. income taxes in the 1950s; that share has fallen to a fifth. The top 0.1 percent of U.S. taxpayers saw their effective tax rate fall from 60 percent in 1960 to 33 percent in 2007, while their share of the income pie soared.

Now, had the top thousandth paid the 1960 rate, the federal government would have received over $281 billion more in 2007.’  

Secondly, between ‘1940 and 1971, developing countries suffered no banking crises and only sixteen currency crises, whereas in the quarter century after 1973 there were 17 banking crises and 57 currency crises’ . Tax Havens affect tax policy in a regressive way – they clearly benefit the most wealthy and not everyone else- so it can be deduced that we have departed away from Adam Smith’s simple viewpoint of progressive taxation.

I will not hide the facts. Ultra-high-net-worth individuals ‘wealth is projected to rise to $35.7 trillion, which implies an additional $8.7 trillion of newly created wealth over the next five years. If this prediction comes true, the planet’s UHNWs will have added the equivalent of the GDPs of Japan and Germany to their stock of wealth, in half a decade.’  

It is a scary, most safe time.

Former Sri Lankan headge-fund manager Raj Rajatnaram stated ruthlessly of our modern society - ‘A society that is indulgent towards corruption and the successfully corrupt is not, as is often argued, a liberal sophisticated society inspired with a shrewd understanding of human nature… On the contrary, it is what one sociologist has aptly termed a “kleptocracy” – a society of the corrupt, for the corrupt, by the corrupt... 

The essence of kleptocracy is that the functioning of the organs of authority is determined by the mechanisms of supply and demand rather than the laws and regulations; and a kleptocratic state constitutes a curiously generalised model of laissez-faire economics even if its economy is nominally socialist.’ 

In light of the figures quoted above, it seems the debate now is how harmful will having a kleptocratic state for the foreseeable be.

Taking it back to Yeat's poem, which i percieved to be more cynical of those who perfect the work, I will observe that society at the moment is lacking perfectors of work, which has led to corruption on a scale not seen since Rome.

As a result of of all the modern conveniences we have now, perfecting the life is easier for everyone, but given we are all intertwined we have to either build a new system and society, or we are all going to be worse off as a result. 

Britains favourite economist John Maynard Keynes wrote when in negotiations with America before the Bretton Woods Agreement that - ‘the decadent international but individualistic capitalist is not a success. It is not intelligent, it is not beautiful, it is not just, it is not virtuous—and it doesn’t deliver the goods. In short, we dislike it, and we are beginning to despise it.’  

These are strong words for an intellectual, and most certainly imply that Keynes would be busy ragin were he to live in the world today, where symbols of individualistic capitalism are a contrast to a community-oriented capitalism.

However, regarding why I have become more and more adverse to tax havens, I feel an argument Milton Friedman’s is even more stirring – ‘One man may prefer a routine job with much time off for basking in the sun to a more exacting job paying a higher salary; another man may prefer the opposite. If both were paid equally in money, their incomes in a more fundamental sense would be unequal. Similarly, equal treatment requires that an individual be paid more for a dirty, unattractive job than for a pleasant rewarding one. Much observed inequality is of this kind.’  

The big question really is, ARE WE REALLY PERFECTING THE LIFE? 

I will not hide, that was the side of the choice I always inclined to prefer. Hence, my viewpoint is really very simple. Political parties have tricked geneartions into believing we are perfecting the life, by being forced to work more hours to attain material goods.

The reality is that now with a great awakening from the cynics of politics and mainstream media, the Cristiano Ronaldo's intent on perfecting one or another, that a balance can be restored, but it will be a slow ride for most. Share your thoughts below.

